.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH WINE 1 "September 1, 1995" "Version 9/1/95" "Windows Emulation"
.SH NAME
wine \- run Windows 3.x programs under Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wine
[
.I options
]
.I program_name
[
.I arguments
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wine
invokes the Linux Windows emulator.
.PP
.B wine 
currently runs a number of games and small applications (approximately
half of the applets and common games actually run), although the entire API
has not been implemented.
.PP
See the files 
.B README,
.B ChangeLog, 
.B configure, 
and the
.B Makefile
contained in the source distribution
to compile
.B wine.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
At present, 
.B wine
will run under any Linux kernel more recent than 0.99.13, or
under recent releases of NetBSD and FreeBSD.
.PP
.B X
must be installed.
.PP
.B libXpm
must be installed.  (It is probably available from the same site 
.B wine
was, or the sources may be FTP'd from ftp.x.org).
.SH INSTALLATION
To install 
.B Wine,
run "./configure", which will detect your specific setup and create
the Makefiles. You can run "./configure --help" to see the available
configuration options. Then do "make depend; make" to build the
.B wine
executable, and then "make install" to install it. By default,
.B wine
is installed in /usr/local/bin; you can specify a different path with
the --prefix option when running
.B configure.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I -allowreadonly
Read only files may be opened in write mode
.TP
.I -backingstore
Turn on backing store
.TP
.I -debug
Enter the debugger before starting application
.TP
.I -debugmsg name[,name]
Turn debugging messages on or off - for instance, 
.I -debugmsg +dll,+heap
will turn on DLL and heap debugging messages.  The full list is:
all, accel, bitblt, bitmap, caret, catch, cdaudio, class, clipboard, clipping,
combo, comm, cursor, dc, dialog, dll, dosfs, driver, edit, enum, event, exec,
file, fixup, font, gdi, global, graphics, icon, int, key, keyboard, ldt,
listbox, local, malloc, mci, mcianim, mciwave, mdi, menu, menucalc, message,
metafile, midi, mmio, mmsys, mmtime, module, msg, nonclient, ole, palette, 
profile, prop, reg, region, relay, resource, scroll, selector, selectors, 
stress, syscolor, task, text, timer, toolhelp, utility, win, winsock.
.TP
.I -depth n
Change the depth to use for multiple-depth screens
.TP
.I -desktop geom
Use a desktop window of the given geometry
.TP
.I -display name
Use the specified display
.TP
.I -dll name
Enables/disables built-in DLL's - starting wine with
.I -dll -commdlg
is probably a good idea.
The full list of DLLs modifiable by this is:
KERNEL, USER, GDI, WIN87EM, SHELL, SOUND, KEYBOARD, WINSOCK, STRESS, MMSYSTEM,
SYSTEM, TOOLHELP, MOUSE, COMMDLG, OLE2, OLE2CONV, OLE2DISP, OLE2NLS, OLE2PROX,
OLECLI, OLESVR, COMPOBJ, STORAGE, WINPROCS, DDEML
.TP
.I -fixedmap
Use a "standard" color map.
.TP
.I -iconic
Start as an icon
.TP
.I -language xx
Set the language to
.I xx
(one of En, Es, De, No, Fr, Fi, Da, Cz, Eo)
.TP
.I -managed
Create each top-level window as a properly managed X window
.TP
.I -mode modename
Determines the mode in which
.B wine
is started. Possible mode names are
.I standard
and
.I enhanced.
Enhanced mode is the default (when no -mode option is specified).
.TP
.I -name name
Set the application name
.TP
.I -privatemap
Use a private color map
.TP
.I -synchronous
Turn on synchronous display mode
.PD 1
.SH PROGRAM/ARGUMENTS
The program name may be specified in DOS format (C:\\WINDOWS\\SOL.EXE) or in 
Linux format (/msdos/windows/sol.exe).  The program being executed may be 
passed arguments by adding them on to the end of the command line invoking
.B wine
(such as: wine "notepad C:\\TEMP\\README.TXT").  Note that
the program name and its arguments 
.I must
be passed as a single parameter, which is usually accomplished by placing
them together in quotation marks.  Multiple applications may be started
by placing all of them on the command line (such as: wine notepad clock).
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
.B wine
expects a configuration file (/usr/local/etc/wine.conf), which should
conform to the following rules (the format is just like a Windows .ini
file).  The actual file name may be specified during the execution of
the
.B configure
script.  Alternatively, you may have a 
.I .winerc
file of this format in your home directory.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE FORMAT
All entries are grouped in sections; a section begins with the line
.br
.I [section name]
.br
and continues until the next section starts. Individual entries
consist of lines of the form
.br
.I entry=value
.br
The value can be any text string, optionally included in single or
double quotes; it can also contain references to environment variables
surrounded by
.I ${}.
Supported section names and entries are listed below.
.PP
.B [Drive X]
.br
This section is used to specify the root directory and type of each
.B DOS
drive, since most Windows applications require a DOS/MS-Windows based 
disk drive & directory scheme. There is one such section for every
drive you want to configure.
.PP
.I format: Path = <rootdirectory>
.br
default: none
.br
If you mounted your dos partition as 
.I /dos
and installed Microsoft Windows in 
C:\\WINDOWS then you should specify 
.I Path=/dos
in the
.I [Drive C]
section.
.PP
.I format: Type = <type>
.br
default: hd
.br
Used to specify the drive type; supported types are floppy, hd, cdrom
and network.
.PP
.I format: Label = <label>
.br
default: 'Drive X'
.br
Used to specify the drive label; limited to 11 characters.
.PP
.I format: Serial = <serial>
.br
default: 12345678
.br
Used to specify the drive serial number, as an 8-character hexadecimal
number.
.PP
.B [wine]
.br
.I format: windows = <directory>
.br
default: C:\\WINDOWS
.br
Used to specify a different Windows directory
.PP
.I format: system = <directory>
.br
default: C:\\WINDOWS\\SYSTEM
.br
Used to specify a different system directory
.PP
.I format: temp = <directory>
.br
default: C:\\TEMP
.br
Used to specify a directory where Windows applications can store 
temporary files.
.PP
.I format: path = <directories separated by semi-colons>
.br
default: C:\\WINDOWS;C:\\WINDOWS\\SYSTEM
.br
Used to specify the path which will be used to find executables and .DLL's.
.PP
.I format: symboltablefile = <filename>
.br
default: wine.sym
.br
Used to specify the path and file name of the symbol table used by the built-in
debugger.
.PP
.B [serialports]
.br
.I format: com[12345678] = <devicename>
.br
default: none
.br
Used to specify the devices which are used as com1 - com8.
.PP
.B [parallelports]
.br
.I format: lpt[12345678] = <devicename>
.br
default: none
.br
Used to specify the devices which are used as lpt1 - lpt8.
.PP
.B [spy]
.br
.I format: file = <filename or CON when logging to stdout>
.br
default: none
.br
Used to specify the file which will be used as
.B logfile.
.PP
.I format: exclude = <message names separated by semicolons>
.br
default: none
.br
Used to specify which messages will be excluded from the logfile.
.PP
.I format: include = <message names separated by semicolons>
.br
default: none
.br Used to specify which messages will be included in the logfile.
.SH SAMPLE CONFIGURATION FILE
[Drive A]
.br
Path=/mnt/fd0
.br
Type=floppy
.PP
[Drive C]
.br
Path=/dos
.br
Type=hd
.br
Label=DOS disk
.PP
[Drive D]
.br
Path=${HOME}/Wine
.PP
[wine]
.br
windows=c:\\windows
.br
system=c:\\windows\\system
.br
temp=c:\\temp
.br
path=c:\\windows;c:\\windows\\system;c:\\winapps\\word
.br
symboltablefile=/usr/local/lib/wine.sym
.PP
[serialports]
.br
com1=/dev/cua1
.br
com2=/dev/cua1
.PP
[parallelports]
.br
lpt1=/dev/lp0
.PP
[spy]
.br
;File=CON
.br
;File=spy.log
.br
Exclude=WM_TIMER;WM_SETCURSOR;WM_MOUSEMOVE;WM_NCHITTEST;
.br
Include=WM_COMMAND;
.SH AUTHORS
.B Wine
is available thanks to the work of Bob Amstadt, Dag Asheim,
Martin Ayotte, Ross Biro, Erik Bos, Fons Botman, John Brezak,
Andrew Bulhak, John Burton, Paul Falstad, Olaf Flebbe, Peter Galbavy,
Ramon Garcia, Hans de Graaf, Charles M. Hannum, Cameron Heide,
Jochen Hoenicke, Jeffrey Hsu, Miguel de Icaza, Alexandre Julliard,
Jon Konrath, Scott A. Laird, Martin von Loewis, Kenneth MacDonald,
Peter MacDonald, William Magro, Marcus Meissner, Graham Menhennitt,
David Metcalfe, Michael Patra, John Richardson, Johannes Ruscheinski,
Thomas Sandford, Constantine Sapuntzakis, Daniel Schepler,
Bernd Schmidt, Yngvi Sigurjonsson, Rick Sladkey, William Smith,
Erik Svendsen, Goran Thyni, Jimmy Tirtawangsa, Jon Tombs,
Linus Torvalds, Gregory Trubetskoy, Michael Veksler, Morten Welinder,
Jan Willamowius, Carl Williams, Karl Guenter Wuensch, Eric Youngdale,
and James Youngman.
.PP
This man page is maintained by Mike Phillips (msphil@facstaff.wm.edu), so 
please send all corrections, comments, flames, etc., to him.
.SH BUGS
There are too many to count, much less list.  Some bugs of note, however,
are that programs requiring VBRUNxxx.DLL are unreliable (with reports of
some working), OLE is not in place, the internal COMMDLG support is not yet
at 100% (although rapidly improving).  Color support for other than 8bpp
(256 colors) is currently flaky.
.PP
A partial list of applications known to work with 
.B wine
include: sol, cruel, golf, clock, notepad, charmap, calc, and wzip11.
The following URLs point to different success/testing lists:
.br
.I http://www.ifi.uio.no/~dash/wine/working-apps.html
.br
.I http://dutifp.twi.tudelft.nl:8000/wine/
.PP
We would like to hear about what software does run under 
.B Wine,
and such reports may be posted to 
.I comp.emulators.ms-windows.wine.
.SH AVAILABILITY
The most recent public version of 
.B wine
can be ftp'ed from tsx-11.mit.edu in the /pub/linux/ALPHA/Wine/development 
directory.  The releases are in the format 'Wine-yymmdd.tar.gz', 
or 'Wine-yymmdd.diff.gz' for the diff's from the previous release.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/wine
The invoker program.
.TP
.I /usr/local/etc/wine.conf
Main configuration file for wine.
.TP
.I ChangeLog
Changes in Wine, since the beginning (most recent changes first)
.TP
.I configure
Shell script to automatically generate Makefiles.  Usually followed by
make to compile wine.
.TP
.I Wine newsgroup
Subscribe to comp.emulators.ms-windows.wine
