.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH WINE 1 "September 1, 1995" "Version 9/1/95" "Windows Emulation"
.SH NAME
wine \- run Windows 3.x programs under Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wine
[
.I options
]
.I program_name
[
.I arguments
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wine
invokes the Linux Windows emulator.
.PP
.B wine 
currently runs a number of games and small applications (approximately
half of the applets and common games actually run), although the entire API
has not been implemented.
.PP
See the files 
.B README,
.B ChangeLog, 
.B configure, 
and the
.B Makefile
contained in the source distribution
to compile
.B wine.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
At present, 
.B wine
will run under any Linux kernel more recent than 0.99.13, or
under recent releases of NetBSD and FreeBSD.
.PP
.B X
must be installed.
.PP
.B libXpm
must be installed.  (It is probably available from the same site 
.B wine
was, or the sources may be FTP'd from ftp.x.org).
.SH INSTALLATION
To install 
.B wine,
run "./configure", which will detect your specific setup and create
the Makefiles. You can run "./configure --help" to see the available
configuration options. Then do "make depend; make" to build the
.B wine
executable.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I -depth n
Change the depth to use for multiple-depth screens
.TP
.I -desktop geom
Use a desktop window of the given geometry
.TP
.I -display name
Use the specified display
.TP
.I -iconic
Start as an icon
.TP
.I -debug
Enter the debugger before starting application
.TP
.I -name name
Set the application name
.TP
.I -privatemap
Use a private color map
.TP
.I -synchronous
Turn on synchronous display mode
.TP
.I -backingstore
Turn on backing store
.TP
.I -spy file
Turn on message spying to the specified file
.TP
.I -debugmsg name[,name]
Turn debugging messages on or off - for instance, 
.I -debugmsg +dll,+heap
will turn on DLL and heap debugging messages.  The full list is:
all, accel, bitblt, bitmap, caret, catch, cdaudio, class, clipboard, clipping,
combo, comm, cursor, dc, dialog, dll, dosfs, driver, edit, enum, event, exec,
file, fixup, font, gdi, global, graphics, icon, int, key, keyboard, ldt,
listbox, local, malloc, mci, mcianim, mciwave, mdi, menu, menucalc, message,
metafile, midi, mmio, mmsys, mmtime, module, msg, nonclient, ole, palette, 
profile, prop, reg, region, relay, resource, scroll, selector, selectors, 
stress, syscolor, task, text, timer, toolhelp, utility, win, winsock.
.TP
.I -dll name
Enables/disables built-in DLL's - starting wine with
.I -dll -commdlg
is probably a good idea.
The full list of DLLs modifiable by this is:
KERNEL, USER, GDI, WIN87EM, SHELL, SOUND, KEYBOARD, WINSOCK, STRESS, MMSYSTEM,
SYSTEM, TOOLHELP, MOUSE, COMMDLG, OLE2, OLE2CONV, OLE2DISP, OLE2NLS, OLE2PROX,
OLECLI, OLESVR, COMPOBJ, STORAGE, WINPROCS, DDEML
.TP
.I -allowreadonly
Read only files may be opened in write mode
.TP
.I -enhanced
Starts wine in Enhanced mode (not guaranteed to work yet)
.PD 1
.SH PROGRAM/ARGUMENTS
The program name may be specified in DOS format (C:\\WINDOWS\\SOL.EXE) or in 
Linux format (/msdos/windows/sol.exe).  The program being executed may be 
passed arguments by adding them on to the end of the command line invoking
.B wine
(such as: wine "notepad C:\\TEMP\\README.TXT").  Note that
the program name and its arguments 
.I must
be passed as a single parameter, which is usually accomplished by placing
them together in quotation marks.  Multiple applications may be started
by placing all of them on the command line (such as: wine notepad clock).
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
.B wine
expects a configuration file (/usr/local/etc/wine.conf), 
which should conform to the following rules.  The actual file name may
be specified during the execution of the
.B configure
script.  Alternatively, you may have a 
.I .winerc
file of this format in your home directory.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE FORMAT
.B [drives]
.br
.I format: <driveletter> = <rootdirectory>
.br
default: none
.br
This section is used to specify the root directory of each 
.B DOS
drive, since most Windows applications require a DOS/MS-Windows based 
disk drive & directory scheme.
.br
If you mounted your dos partition as 
.I /dos
and installed Microsoft Windows in 
C:\\WINDOWS then you should specify 
.I c=/dos
in the drives section.
.PP
.B [wine]
.br
.I format: windows = <directory>
.br
default: C:\\WINDOWS
.br
Used to specify a different Windows directory
.PP
.I format: system = <directory>
.br
default: C:\\WINDOWS\\SYSTEM
.br
Used to specify a different system directory
.PP
.I format: temp = <directory>
.br
default: C:\\TEMP
.br
Used to specify a directory where Windows applications can store 
temporary files.
.PP
.I format: path = <directories separated by semi-colons>
.br
default: C:\\WINDOWS;C:\\WINDOWS\\SYSTEM
.br
Used to specify the path which will be used to find executables and .DLL's.
.PP
.I format: symboltablefile = <filename>
.br
default: wine.sym
.br
Used to specify the path and file name of the symbol table used by the built-in
debugger.
.PP
.B [serialports]
.br
.I format: com[12345678] = <devicename>
.br
default: none
.br
Used to specify the devices which are used as com1 - com8.
.PP
.B [parallelports]
.br
.I format: lpt[12345678] = <devicename>
.br
default: none
.br
Used to specify the devices which are used as lpt1 - lpt8.
.PP
.B [spy]
.br
.I format: file = <filename or CON when logging to stdout>
.br
default: none
.br
Used to specify the file which will be used as
.B logfile.
.PP
.I format: exclude = <message names separated by semicolons>
.br
default: none
.br
Used to specify which messages will be excluded from the logfile.
.PP
.I format: include = <message names separated by semicolons>
.br
default: none
.br Used to specify which messages will be included in the logfile.
.SH SAMPLE wine.conf
[drives]
.br
a=/mnt/fd0
.br
c=/dos
.br
d=~/Wine
.PP
[wine]
.br
windows=c:\\windows
.br
system=c:\\windows\\system
.br
temp=c:\\temp
.br
path=c:\\windows;c:\\windows\\system;c:\\winapps\\word
.br
symboltablefile=/usr/local/lib/wine.sym
.PP
[serialports]
.br
com1=/dev/cua1
.br
com2=/dev/cua1
.PP
[parallelports]
.br
lpt1=/dev/lp0
.PP
[spy]
.br
;File=CON
.br
;File=spy.log
.br
Exclude=WM_TIMER;WM_SETCURSOR;WM_MOUSEMOVE;WM_NCHITTEST;
.br
Include=WM_COMMAND;
.SH AUTHORS
.B Wine
is available thanks to the work of Bob Amstadt, Dag Asheim,
Martin Ayotte, Ross Biro, Erik Bos, Fons Botman, John Brezak,
Andrew Bulhak, John Burton, Paul Falstad, Olaf Flebbe, Peter Galbavy,
Ramon Garcia, Hans de Graaf, Charles M. Hannum, Cameron Heide,
Jochen Hoenicke, Jeffrey Hsu, Miguel de Icaza, Alexandre Julliard,
Jon Konrath, Scott A. Laird, Martin von Loewis, Kenneth MacDonald,
Peter MacDonald, William Magro, Marcus Meissner, Graham Menhennitt,
David Metcalfe, Michael Patra, John Richardson, Johannes Ruscheinski,
Thomas Sandford, Constantine Sapuntzakis, Daniel Schepler,
Bernd Schmidt, Yngvi Sigurjonsson, Rick Sladkey, William Smith,
Erik Svendsen, Goran Thyni, Jimmy Tirtawangsa, Jon Tombs,
Linus Torvalds, Gregory Trubetskoy, Michael Veksler, Morten Welinder,
Jan Willamowius, Carl Williams, Karl Guenter Wuensch, Eric Youngdale,
and James Youngman.
.PP
This man page is maintained by Mike Phillips (msphil@facstaff.wm.edu), so 
please send all corrections, comments, flames, etc., to him.
.SH BUGS
There are too many to count, much less list.  Some bugs of note, however,
are that programs requiring VBRUNxxx.DLL are unreliable (with reports of
some working), OLE is not in place, the internal COMMDLG support is not yet
at 100% (although rapidly improving).  Color support for other than 8bpp
(256 colors) is currently flaky.
.PP
Currently, no directories in the path can have upper-case letters in them
(ex. /msdos/driveC), as the conversions necessary to handle the msdos 
filename conventions currently cause them to be lost.
.PP
A partial list of applications known to work with 
.B wine
include: sol, cruel, golf, clock, notepad, charmap, calc, and wzip11.
The following URLs point to different success/testing lists:
.br
.I http://www.ifi.uio.no/~dash/wine/working-apps.html
.br
.I http://dutifp.twi.tudelft.nl:8000/wine/
.PP
We would like to hear about what software does run under 
.B Wine,
and such reports may be posted to 
.I comp.emulators.ms-windows.wine.
.SH AVAILABILITY
The most recent public version of 
.B wine
can be ftp'ed from tsx-11.mit.edu in the /pub/linux/ALPHA/Wine/development 
directory.  The releases are in the format 'Wine-yymmdd.tar.gz', 
or 'Wine-yymmdd.diff.gz' for the diff's from the previous release.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/wine
The invoker program.
.TP
.I /usr/local/etc/wine.conf
Main configuration file for wine.
.TP
.I ChangeLog
Changes in Wine, since the beginning (most recent changes first)
.TP
.I configure
Shell script to automatically generate Makefiles.  Usually followed by make 
(or gmake on *BSD systems) to compile wine.
.TP
.I Wine newsgroup
Subscribe to comp.emulators.ms-windows.wine
